README.md, before:

# KBUtilLib

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/KBUtilLib.svg)][pypi status]
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/pypi/status/KBUtilLib.svg)][pypi status]
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/KBUtilLib)][pypi status]
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/KBUtilLib)][license]

[![Read the documentation at https://KBUtilLib.readthedocs.io/](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/KBUtilLib/latest.svg?label=Read%20the%20Docs)][read the docs]
[![Tests](https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)][tests]
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/cshenry/KBUtilLib/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)][codecov]

[![pre-commit](https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-enabled-brightgreen?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=white)][pre-commit]
[![Ruff codestyle][ruff badge]][ruff project]

> **A modular utility framework for scientific computing and bioinformatics**
>
> KBUtilLib provides a flexible, composable set of utilities for working with KBase data, genomics, biochemistry databases, metabolic modeling, and interactive notebook environments.

## Features

- **Modular Architecture**: Inherit from only the utility modules you need
- **Composable Design**: Create custom utility combinations via multiple inheritance
- **Shared Environment**: Centralized configuration and secret management
- **KBase Integration**: Workspace access, SDK utilities, and data manipulation tools
- **Genomics Utilities**: Sequence analysis, ORF finding, translation, and genome annotation
- **Biochemistry Database**: ModelSEED biochemistry search and analysis utilities
- **Metabolic Modeling**: Model analysis, FBA preparation, and pathway utilities
- **Annotation Tools**: Gene and protein annotation workflows and utilities
- **Notebook Support**: Enhanced display and interactive features for Jupyter

## Quick Start

### Basic Usage

```python
from kbutillib import KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils

# Use individual utilities
genome_utils = KBGenomeUtils()
dna_sequence = "ATGAAAGCCTAG"
protein = genome_utils.translate_sequence(dna_sequence)
print(f"Translated: {dna_sequence} -> {protein}")

# Use with shared configuration
env = SharedEnvUtils(config_file="config.yaml")
token = env.get_token("kbase")
```

### Composable Design

```python
from kbutillib import KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils

# Create custom utility combinations
class MyWorkflow(KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    def __init__(self, **kwargs):
        super().__init__(**kwargs)

    def analyze_genome(self, genome_ref, workspace_id):
        # Get genome data via KBase workspace
        genome_data = self.get_object(workspace_id, genome_ref)

        # Analyze with genome utilities
        genome_info = self.parse_genome_object(genome_data)
        features = self.extract_features_by_type(genome_data, 'CDS')

        return genome_info, features

# Use your custom workflow
workflow = MyWorkflow(config_file="config.yaml")
```

### Pre-built Combinations

```python
from kbutillib.examples import KBaseWorkbench, NotebookAnalysis

# Complete KBase analysis environment
workbench = KBaseWorkbench(config_file="config.yaml")

# Notebook-optimized analysis tools
notebook_env = NotebookAnalysis()
notebook_env.display_dataframe(my_dataframe)
```

## Architecture

### Core Modules

- **`BaseUtils`**: Foundation class with logging, configuration, and dependency management
- **`SharedEnvUtils`**: Configuration file loading and authentication token management
- **`NotebookUtils`**: Jupyter notebook integration and enhanced display utilities
- **`KBWSUtils`**: KBase workspace service API access and object management
- **`KBGenomeUtils`**: Genomic sequence analysis, translation, and feature extraction
- **`MSBiochemUtils`**: ModelSEED biochemistry database search and compound analysis
- **`KBModelUtils`**: Metabolic model analysis, FBA preparation, and pathway utilities
- **`KBSDKUtils`**: KBase SDK development tools and utility functions
- **`KBAnnotationUtils`**: Gene and protein annotation workflows and utilities
- **`KBCallbackUtils`**: Callback handling for KBase SDK applications
- **`ArgoUtils`**: Language model integration and inference utilities

### Design Philosophy

The framework follows a composable design where you can inherit from any combination of utility modules to create exactly the functionality you need:

```python
# Minimal combination
class SimpleTools(KBWSUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    pass

# Complete analysis suite
class FullWorkbench(KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, MSBiochemUtils, KBModelUtils, NotebookUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    pass

# Domain-specific combination
class BiochemistryTools(MSBiochemUtils, KBModelUtils, NotebookUtils):
    pass
```

## Module Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is available for each utility module:

### Core Foundation Modules

- **[BaseUtils](docs/modules/base_utils.md)** - Base class with logging, error handling, and dependency management
- **[SharedEnvUtils](docs/modules/shared_env_utils.md)** - Configuration and authentication token management

### Data Access and Workspace Modules

- **[KBWSUtils](docs/modules/kb_ws_utils.md)** - KBase workspace operations and object management
- **[MSBiochemUtils](docs/modules/ms_biochem_utils.md)** - ModelSEED biochemistry database access and search

### Analysis and Processing Modules

- **[KBGenomeUtils](docs/modules/kb_genome_utils.md)** - Genome analysis, feature extraction, and sequence operations
- **[KBAnnotationUtils](docs/modules/kb_annotation_utils.md)** - Gene and protein annotation workflows
- **[KBModelUtils](docs/modules/kb_model_utils.md)** - Metabolic modeling and flux balance analysis

### Development and Integration Modules

- **[KBSDKUtils](docs/modules/kb_sdk_utils.md)** - KBase SDK development tools and workflows
- **[KBCallbackUtils](docs/modules/kb_callback_utils.md)** - Callback service management for SDK applications
- **[ArgoUtils](docs/modules/argo_utils.md)** - Language model integration and inference utilities

### Interactive and Visualization Modules

- **[NotebookUtils](docs/modules/notebook_utils.md)** - Jupyter notebook enhancements and interactive displays

Each module documentation includes:

- **Overview and Key Features** - What the module does and its main capabilities
- **Class Definition and Constructor** - How to initialize and configure the module
- **Core Methods** - Essential methods and their usage
- **Advanced Features** - Specialized functionality and integration options
- **Usage Examples** - Practical code examples and common patterns
- **Configuration Options** - Customization and setup parameters
- **Error Handling** - Common issues and troubleshooting guidance
- **Dependencies** - Required packages and integration requirements

- **Modern Python Development**: Built with `uv` for fast dependency management and packaging
- **Code Quality**: Comprehensive linting with `ruff`, type checking with `mypy`, and testing with `pytest`
- **Scientific Workflows**: Ready for data analysis, computational research, and scientific computing

  - **Containerization**: Docker support for reproducible deployment and environment isolation

- **Documentation**: Automated documentation with Sphinx and Read the Docs
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions for automated testing, linting, and deployment

## Requirements

- Python 3.9+
- `uv` package manager (recommended) or `pip`

## Installation

### Using uv (Recommended)

```console
$ uv add KBUtilLib
```

### Using pip

You can install _KBUtilLib_ via [pip] from [PyPI]:

```console
$ pip install KBUtilLib
```

### Development Installation

For development, clone the repository and install with development dependencies:

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib.git
$ cd KBUtilLib
$ uv sync --all-groups
```

## Usage

### Command Line Interface

```console
$ KBUtilLib --help
```

### Docker

Build and run with Docker:

```console
$ docker build -t KBUtilLib .
$ docker run KBUtilLib
```

For detailed usage instructions, please see the [Command-line Reference].

## Contributing

Contributions are very welcome.
To learn more, see the [Contributor Guide].

## License

Distributed under the terms of the [MIT license][license],
_KBUtilLib_ is free and open source software.

## Issues

If you encounter any problems,
please [file an issue] along with a detailed description.

## Credits

This project was generated from Christopher Henry's [cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python] template,
which is based on [@cjolowicz]'s [uv hypermodern python cookiecutter] template.

**Developed at Argonne National Laboratory**

[@cjolowicz]: https://github.com/cjolowicz
[pypi]: https://pypi.org/
[pypi status]: https://pypi.org/project/KBUtilLib/
[read the docs]: https://KBUtilLib.readthedocs.io/
[tests]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/actions?workflow=Tests
[codecov]: https://app.codecov.io/gh/cshenry/KBUtilLib
[pre-commit]: https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit
[ruff badge]: https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json
[ruff project]: https://github.com/charliermarsh/ruff
[cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python]: https://github.com/chenry/cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python
[uv hypermodern python cookiecutter]: https://github.com/bosd/cookiecutter-uv-hypermodern-python
[file an issue]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/issues
[pip]: https://pip.pypa.io/

<!-- github-only -->

[license]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/blob/main/LICENSE
[contributor guide]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md
[command-line reference]: https://KBUtilLib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html

Commit message:

Enhanced DataFrame display with interactive features and text wrapping
Major improvements to NotebookUtils:
- Added interactive DataFrame display with itables integration
- Implemented pagination, search, and sorting capabilities
- Fixed text wrapping issues in table cells with custom CSS
- Added configurable display options (page size, scrolling, height)
- Clear fallback messaging when itables not available
- Added notebook dependency group to pyproject.toml
- Updated documentation and examples

Other updates:
- Enhanced base utilities and model utilities
- Fixed import issues and cleaned up ms_biochem_utils
- Added comprehensive test notebooks and examples
- Updated CI/CD workflows and documentation

README.md, after:

# KBUtilLib

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/KBUtilLib.svg)][pypi status]
[![Status](https://img.shields.io/pypi/status/KBUtilLib.svg)][pypi status]
[![Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/KBUtilLib)][pypi status]
[![License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/KBUtilLib)][license]

[![Tests](https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/workflows/Tests/badge.svg)][tests]
[![Codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/cshenry/KBUtilLib/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)][codecov]

[![pre-commit](https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-enabled-brightgreen?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=white)][pre-commit]
[![Ruff codestyle][ruff badge]][ruff project]

> **A modular utility framework for scientific computing and bioinformatics**
>
> KBUtilLib provides a flexible, composable set of utilities for working with KBase data, genomics, biochemistry databases, metabolic modeling, and interactive notebook environments.

## Features

- **Modular Architecture**: Inherit from only the utility modules you need
- **Composable Design**: Create custom utility combinations via multiple inheritance
- **Shared Environment**: Centralized configuration and secret management
- **KBase Integration**: Workspace access, SDK utilities, and data manipulation tools
- **Genomics Utilities**: Sequence analysis, ORF finding, translation, and genome annotation
- **Biochemistry Database**: ModelSEED biochemistry search and analysis utilities
- **Metabolic Modeling**: Model analysis, FBA preparation, and pathway utilities
- **Annotation Tools**: Gene and protein annotation workflows and utilities
- **Notebook Support**: Enhanced display and interactive features for Jupyter

## Quick Start

### Basic Usage

```python
from kbutillib import KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils

# Use individual utilities
genome_utils = KBGenomeUtils()
dna_sequence = "ATGAAAGCCTAG"
protein = genome_utils.translate_sequence(dna_sequence)
print(f"Translated: {dna_sequence} -> {protein}")

# Use with shared configuration
env = SharedEnvUtils(config_file="config.yaml")
token = env.get_token("kbase")
```

### Composable Design

```python
from kbutillib import KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils

# Create custom utility combinations
class MyWorkflow(KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    def __init__(self, **kwargs):
        super().__init__(**kwargs)

    def analyze_genome(self, genome_ref, workspace_id):
        # Get genome data via KBase workspace
        genome_data = self.get_object(workspace_id, genome_ref)

        # Analyze with genome utilities
        genome_info = self.parse_genome_object(genome_data)
        features = self.extract_features_by_type(genome_data, 'CDS')

        return genome_info, features

# Use your custom workflow
workflow = MyWorkflow(config_file="config.yaml")
```

### Pre-built Combinations

```python
from kbutillib.examples import KBaseWorkbench, NotebookAnalysis

# Complete KBase analysis environment
workbench = KBaseWorkbench(config_file="config.yaml")

# Notebook-optimized analysis tools
notebook_env = NotebookAnalysis()
notebook_env.display_dataframe(my_dataframe)
```

## Architecture

### Core Modules

- **`BaseUtils`**: Foundation class with logging, configuration, and dependency management
- **`SharedEnvUtils`**: Configuration file loading and authentication token management
- **`NotebookUtils`**: Jupyter notebook integration and enhanced display utilities
- **`KBWSUtils`**: KBase workspace service API access and object management
- **`KBGenomeUtils`**: Genomic sequence analysis, translation, and feature extraction
- **`MSBiochemUtils`**: ModelSEED biochemistry database search and compound analysis
- **`KBModelUtils`**: Metabolic model analysis, FBA preparation, and pathway utilities
- **`KBSDKUtils`**: KBase SDK development tools and utility functions
- **`KBAnnotationUtils`**: Gene and protein annotation workflows and utilities
- **`KBCallbackUtils`**: Callback handling for KBase SDK applications
- **`ArgoUtils`**: Language model integration and inference utilities

### Design Philosophy

The framework follows a composable design where you can inherit from any combination of utility modules to create exactly the functionality you need:

```python
# Minimal combination
class SimpleTools(KBWSUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    pass

# Complete analysis suite
class FullWorkbench(KBWSUtils, KBGenomeUtils, MSBiochemUtils, KBModelUtils, NotebookUtils, SharedEnvUtils):
    pass

# Domain-specific combination
class BiochemistryTools(MSBiochemUtils, KBModelUtils, NotebookUtils):
    pass
```

## Module Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is available for each utility module:

### Core Foundation Modules

- **[BaseUtils](docs/modules/base_utils.md)** - Base class with logging, error handling, and dependency management
- **[SharedEnvUtils](docs/modules/shared_env_utils.md)** - Configuration and authentication token management

### Data Access and Workspace Modules

- **[KBWSUtils](docs/modules/kb_ws_utils.md)** - KBase workspace operations and object management
- **[MSBiochemUtils](docs/modules/ms_biochem_utils.md)** - ModelSEED biochemistry database access and search

### Analysis and Processing Modules

- **[KBGenomeUtils](docs/modules/kb_genome_utils.md)** - Genome analysis, feature extraction, and sequence operations
- **[KBAnnotationUtils](docs/modules/kb_annotation_utils.md)** - Gene and protein annotation workflows
- **[KBModelUtils](docs/modules/kb_model_utils.md)** - Metabolic modeling and flux balance analysis

### Development and Integration Modules

- **[KBSDKUtils](docs/modules/kb_sdk_utils.md)** - KBase SDK development tools and workflows
- **[KBCallbackUtils](docs/modules/kb_callback_utils.md)** - Callback service management for SDK applications
- **[ArgoUtils](docs/modules/argo_utils.md)** - Language model integration and inference utilities

### Interactive and Visualization Modules

- **[NotebookUtils](docs/modules/notebook_utils.md)** - Jupyter notebook enhancements and interactive displays

Each module documentation includes:

- **Overview and Key Features** - What the module does and its main capabilities
- **Class Definition and Constructor** - How to initialize and configure the module
- **Core Methods** - Essential methods and their usage
- **Advanced Features** - Specialized functionality and integration options
- **Usage Examples** - Practical code examples and common patterns
- **Configuration Options** - Customization and setup parameters
- **Error Handling** - Common issues and troubleshooting guidance
- **Dependencies** - Required packages and integration requirements

- **Modern Python Development**: Built with `uv` for fast dependency management and packaging
- **Code Quality**: Comprehensive linting with `ruff`, type checking with `mypy`, and testing with `pytest`
- **Scientific Workflows**: Ready for data analysis, computational research, and scientific computing

  - **Containerization**: Docker support for reproducible deployment and environment isolation

- **Documentation**: Automated documentation with Sphinx and Read the Docs
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions for automated testing, linting, and deployment

## Requirements

- Python 3.9+
- `uv` package manager (recommended) or `pip`

## Installation

### Using uv (Recommended)

```console
$ uv add KBUtilLib
```

### Using pip

You can install _KBUtilLib_ via [pip] from [PyPI]:

```console
$ pip install KBUtilLib
```

### Notebook Support

For enhanced Jupyter notebook features (interactive tables with pagination and search):

```console
$ pip install "KBUtilLib[notebook]"
# or with uv:
$ uv add "KBUtilLib[notebook]"
```

This installs optional dependencies for interactive DataFrame display:
- `itables` - Modern interactive tables with pagination and search
- `ipywidgets` - Interactive widgets
- `pandas` - DataFrame support  
- `tqdm` - Progress bars

### Development Installation

For development, clone the repository and install with development dependencies:

```console
$ git clone https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib.git
$ cd KBUtilLib
$ uv sync --all-groups
```

## Usage

### Command Line Interface

```console
$ KBUtilLib --help
```

### Docker

Build and run with Docker:

```console
$ docker build -t KBUtilLib .
$ docker run KBUtilLib
```

For detailed usage instructions, please see the [Command-line Reference].

## Contributing

Contributions are very welcome.
To learn more, see the [Contributor Guide].

## License

Distributed under the terms of the [MIT license][license],
_KBUtilLib_ is free and open source software.

## Issues

If you encounter any problems,
please [file an issue] along with a detailed description.

## Credits

This project was generated from Christopher Henry's [cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python] template,
which is based on [@cjolowicz]'s [uv hypermodern python cookiecutter] template.

**Developed at Argonne National Laboratory**

[@cjolowicz]: https://github.com/cjolowicz
[pypi]: https://pypi.org/
[pypi status]: https://pypi.org/project/KBUtilLib/
[tests]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/actions?workflow=Tests
[codecov]: https://app.codecov.io/gh/cshenry/KBUtilLib
[pre-commit]: https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit
[ruff badge]: https://img.shields.io/endpoint?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/astral-sh/ruff/main/assets/badge/v2.json
[ruff project]: https://github.com/charliermarsh/ruff
[cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python]: https://github.com/chenry/cookiecutter-henry-hypermodern-python
[uv hypermodern python cookiecutter]: https://github.com/bosd/cookiecutter-uv-hypermodern-python
[file an issue]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/issues
[pip]: https://pip.pypa.io/

<!-- github-only -->

[license]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/blob/main/LICENSE
[contributor guide]: https://github.com/cshenry/KBUtilLib/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md
